Add information to API Evictions from Safely Drain a Node (#28290)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/api-eviction.md

{{< glossary_definition term_id="api-eviction" length="short" >}} </br>

You can request eviction by calling the Eviction API directly, or programmatically
using a client of the {{<glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-apiserver" text="API server">}}, like the `kubectl drain` command. This
creates an `Eviction` object, which causes the API server to terminate the Pod.

API-initiated evictions respect your configured [`PodDisruptionBudgets`](/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)
and [`terminationGracePeriodSeconds`](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle#pod-termination). 

Using the API to create an Eviction object for a Pod is like performing a
policy-controlled [`DELETE` operation](/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/pod-v1/#delete-delete-a-pod)
on the Pod. 

## Calling the Eviction API

You can use a [Kubernetes language client](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/access-cluster-api/#programmatic-access-to-the-api)
to access the Kubernetes API and create an `Eviction` object. To do this, you
POST the attempted operation, similar to the following example:

> {{< tabs name="Eviction_example" >}}

Reviewer: nit (for information, not worth fixing): I'd write
```markdown
{{< tabs name="calling-eviction-api-example" >}}
```

{{% tab name="policy/v1" %}}
{{< note >}}

> `policy/v1` Eviction is available in v1.22+. Use `policy/v1beta1` with prior releases.

Reviewer 2: nit: specify Kubernetes v1.22
`policy/v1` Eviction is available since Kubernetes version 1.22.

{{< /note >}}

```json
{
  "apiVersion": "policy/v1",
  "kind": "Eviction",
  "metadata": {
    "name": "quux",
    "namespace": "default"
  }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="policy/v1beta1" %}}
{{< note >}}

> Deprecated in v1.22 in favor of `policy/v1`

Reviewer 2: Specify what is deprecated?

  misconfiguration, like if multiple PodDisruptionBudgets reference the same Pod.

If the Pod you want to evict isn't part of a workload that has a
PodDisruptionBudget, the API server always returns `200 OK` and allows the
eviction. 

If the API server allows the eviction, the Pod is deleted as follows:

1. The `Pod` resource in the API server is updated with a deletion timestamp,
   after which the API server considers the `Pod` resource to be terminated. The
   `Pod` resource is also marked with the configured grace period.
1. The {{<glossary_tooltip term_id="kubelet" text="kubelet">}} on the node where the local Pod is running notices that the `Pod`
   resource is marked for termination and starts to gracefully shut down the
   local Pod.
1. While the kubelet is shutting the Pod down, the control plane removes the Pod
   from {{<glossary_tooltip term_id="endpoint" text="Endpoint">}} and
   {{<glossary_tooltip term_id="endpoint-slice" text="EndpointSlice">}}
   objects. As a result, controllers no longer consider the Pod as a valid object.
1. After the grace period for the Pod expires, the kubelet forcefully terminates
   the local Pod.

> 1. The kubelet tells the API server to remove the `Pod` resource.

Reviewer 3: Are API evictions special cased? - In the case of a kubelet-initiated eviction the Pod gets an `Evicted` status, but still then needs to eventually be explicitly deleted separately from the eviction process

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether the kubelet or some control plane component sends the **DELETE** request / performs the equivalent operation.

It's possible that API-initiated eviction lists the kubelet as a finalizer, and the action that the kubelet takes is to remove its finalizer once the Pod has terminated (gracefully or otherwise). In that case, it's the API server that spots there is a resource pending deletion with no finalizer remaining, and triggers cleanup.

SIG Node are likely to be the best folks to confirm this, as they look after both the kubelet code and (most of) the Pod API.

Reviewer 3: I'm part of sig-node 😅  (and have spent a lot of time looking at kubelet-initiated eviction code).

I've been meaning to actually test this (or look into api-server code) to see what happens, but haven't got around to it yet bc of other priorities. I'll try and look next week,

creates an `Eviction` object, which causes the API server to terminate the Pod.

API-initiated evictions respect your configured [`PodDisruptionBudgets`](/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)
and [`terminationGracePeriodSeconds`](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle#pod-termination). 

Using the API to create an Eviction object for a Pod is like performing a
policy-controlled DELETE operation on the Pod. 

## Calling the Eviction API

You can use a [Kubernetes language client](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/access-cluster-api/#programmatic-access-to-the-api)
to access the Kubernetes API and create an `Eviction` object. To do this, you
POST the attempted operation.

Alternatively, you can attempt an eviction operation by accessing the API using
`curl` or `wget`. 

## How API-initiated eviction works

When you attempt to create an `Eviction` object, the API responds in one of the
following ways:

* `200 OK`: the eviction is allowed and the Pod is deleted, similar to sending a
  `DELETE` request to the Pod URL.
* `429 Too Many Requests`: the eviction is not currently allowed because of the
  configured PodDisruptionBudget. You may be able to attempt the eviction again

>   later.

Reviewer: This response could also indicate general API rate limiting, right?

* `500 Internal Server Error`: the eviction is not allowed because there is a
  misconfiguration, like if multiple PodDisruptionBudgets reference the same Pod.

> If the Pod you want to evict doesn't have a PodDisruptionBudget, the server always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Pod you want to evict isn't part of a workload that has a PodDisruptionBudget,
the API server always
```

returns `200 OK` and allows the eviction.

> [[Need more information about the eviction object. Once it's created, what happens
> to cause the Pod to shut down? What control plane components work to get the job done?]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The control plane signals the eviction to the kubelet running that Pod; that
node's kubelet notices the signal and triggers pod shutdown.
```

We don't have to specify the control plane component involved. I think it's the API server but in the distant future it might not be.

Reviewer: > What control plane component sends the eviction signal to the kubelet?

Maybe it's never built in to the control plane? Might be something like the [descheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler), or `kubectl drain`.

Reviewer 4: Aren't we describing here what happens **after** the eviction object has been created? How does that finally cause the kubelet to terminate the pod.

Reviewer: Ah, right, yep. I think it's this:
the kubelet uses a [watch](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts/#efficient-detection-of-changes) for each Pod it's running, and sees that the Pod has been deleted (equivalent to an HTTP `DELETE`). When the kubelet finds it is running a Pod with no local static Pod and no remote Pod in the API either, the kubelet shuts down that Pod's containers and then the Pod itself.

We might want to migrate some of the details that currently live within https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/ into the Concepts section, and change that task page to link to the moved text.

Reviewer: The “multiple” watches might be a single `GET` request using a field selector; I haven't looked at the code at all.

Reviewer 4: So the Eviction object creation directly causes the Pod to get a deletion timestamp?

Reviewer: > So the Eviction object creation directly causes the Pod to get a deletion timestamp?

I think: Yes, because the checks that apply (eg PodDisruptionBudget) happen at a phase that is logically earlier than the creation of the Eviction.

You don't actually find an Eviction object in the API as a result of a successful creation, but you could model it a bit like this:
- request eviction
- admission checks (include PodDisruptionBudget) succeed
- eviction at API level happens atomically
   - Eviction subresource created
   - Pod resource is marked for deletion
   - Eviction subresource removed as Pod is being deleted

The Pod API is complicated and several SIGs are involved in just that bit I've explained, so it might be wrong. How about we write that up and then see about getting a tech review?

Author: > We might want to migrate some of the details that currently live within 
> https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/ into the Concepts section, and change 
> that task page to link to the moved text.

I like that idea. I think it's out of scope for this PR but will be a good follow-up issue. 

> How about we write that up and then see about getting a tech review?

Will do.

Author: @sftim see if this looks any better?
